Once around, the moons that never were.
So, the story today starts with the
Mariner 10 flyby of Mercury in 1974,
our first chance to get some really good
photographs of the innermost planet of
the solar system. And as the spacecraft
was approaching and beginning to take
images of this little planet, this
little gray disc covered in craters, it
noted some strange bright ultraviolet
emissions
just next to the planet. And then the
next day they had another look and they
were gone. And then three days later
they had reappeared.
It seemed that there was a moving object
in the field.
It must be close to Mercury and it
seemed to be doing a speed of about 4
km/ second which was about right for the
orbit of a moon.
So a press conference was scheduled to
announce the discovery of the first
known moon of Mercury.
But turned out the press already knew
and was starting to write the stories
themselves. Something that happens a lot
today. Um, this rather blurred cutting
here is from a very old copy of the New
York Times. Um, possible Mercury moon
detected by Mariner 10.
Well, this is all well and good, but the
object kept on moving as the spacecraft
kept flinging along on its flyby mission
past Mercury.
So the bright UV emissions moved away
from the planet and it was soon realized
this could not be a moon.
And embarrassingly it turned out to be
the hot star 31 Cretarus in the
constellation of Crater, a strong bright
high temperature star putting out a lot
of ultraviolet light. And that uh made
perfect sense. And unfortunately, there
was no moon of Mercury, and we have
never actually found one. Uh, we're
pretty sure there just isn't one. So,
the moon that never was.
Next up, we have Venus. And in 1672,
famous astronomer Cassini reported
seeing an object near to Venus. He saw
it again in 1686 and reported that it
was a quarter the size of Venus and had
the same phase.
Now, it turns out he wasn't the first
person to come up with the reports of an
object near Venus, probably orbiting
around it, Venus's moon. This all goes
back to uh Francesco Fontana
1645 and 1646. And this is his drawing.
It's actually a woodcut of an object
that he thought he was observing near
the cresant of Venus. And uh it's rather
strange because we have a dark dot
against Venus. Then we have two of them
and then we have a couple of individual
ones in different positions. So I'm not
quite sure what it was he was really
seeing there. Although there is an
intriguing possibility.
But these observations led to people
going and looking
trying to be able to confirm it. And so
during the period of about a hundred
years there were more than 30 reports.
So you can see uh Fontana there in 1645
and six, Cassini in 7 1672 and 86 and
then we have others James Short Mayor
Lrange and so on all the way through to
with uh quite a number of reports coming
in of the observation of this companion
to Venus.
Now, occasionally Venus passes in front
of the sun. Usually, it does it about
every couple of hundred years, but it'll
do a pair two transits eight years
apart. And in 18 uh sorry, 1761,
there was such a transit. And we have
the report of it here with a nice
drawing with the disc of Venus passing
across plotted very accurately here. Um,
and there were reports of a small dot
following Venus across the disc of the
sun, seeming to confirm the existence of
this moon.
But eight years later, in the second of
the pair of eclipses, Captain Cook was
sent and armed with telescopic equipment
for projecting highresolution images of
the transit of the planet Venus in front
of the sun, projected onto a diagram and
then drawn around. He produced this very
uh nicely laid out diagram of the
beginning and motion of Venus. and he
would have been able to see a similar
large dot of a moon if there had been
one and it's just not recorded there.
He's got the uh black dot effect of the
optical effect of the um
silhouette of Venus moving across the
limb of the sun which is always quite
interesting. I've seen that uh when I
saw the transit of Venus a number of
years ago now in 2004 we were lucky
enough to be able to see it. If you
didn't, you've missed it because it's
not going to happen till uh 2130 or
something like that. So, it' be a while
to wait.
Um now, the lack of an observation is
not evidence that it's not there. It
could have been that during this period
of time, the moon was lined up with and
either in front of or behind Venus for
the entire transit. uh the transit takes
uh a goodly number of hours uh and
that's perfectly possible that a moon
would be in eclipse from our point of
view during that time. So absence of
evidence is not evidence of absence.
It was given the name neath by an
astronomer Huzao who suggested that it
might actually be an independent planet
in a similar orbit to Venus taking 283
days and therefore aligning with Venus
occasionally roughly every thousand days
or so the two would be in the same part
of the sky. and he suggested that this
smaller planet
as yet uh unttracked and uncomputed in
terms of an orbit might be there um or
that it might be actually a true moon of
Venus and he gave it the name neath
named after an Egyptian goddess.
But it turns out there is no such
object. And what had happened was that
telescopes during this time had become
so much more powerful and much uh larger
in their light gathering capacity. These
big long refractors with a very large
lens at the front were producing very
very bright images of objects. And of
course Venus is very very bright. And
what happens under those circumstances
is that the light can pass into the
telescope through the main lens and into
the eyepiece and produce a very bright
image.
But each optical surface in the
combination of lenses presents the
opportunity for a double reflection. A
small part of the light can bounce back
off one optical surface and back out of
the lens in the other direction or be
reflected a second time and then come
back down the tube into the eyepiece on
a different trajectory
creating a ghost image. And I've seen
this when trying to image some of the
brighter planets and getting a secondary
image of the uh planets smaller and
offset to the side but looking very very
similar. And of course this explains
exactly why Cassini's observation always
showed neath to have the same phase as
Venus because he was in fact seeing
Venus itself and always smaller and a
quarter the size because of the nature
of the magnifying effect of such a
double reflection. So that's certainly
what many of these observers were seeing
and Captain Cook was right. there was no
such object at all. Uh but Fontana, some
of those black dots that he was
observing in his images, uh there's
every chance those were something
floating around in his eye. Um and we've
c certainly seen that sort of effect in
other stories such as the canals on
Mars, which is uh something I talk about
in one of my other talks. So no moon of
Mercury, no moon of Venus.
But then we come to the story of
Pettit's moon. The first known claim of
a second moon of Earth. Frederick Pettit
at the Too Observatory announced that he
had observed another moon in 1846.
And a pair of other observers, Leon and
Dsier, also said they had seen it. And
they calculated a very very peculiar
orbit for it. Highly elliptical and
coming very close to the Earth. Just
going from 3,570
km down to only 11.4 km above the
surface of the Earth.
That's in the stratosphere. It makes no
sense at all.
And uh petit was claiming a period of 2
hours and 44 minutes. So this would have
been very very rapid indeed. Well, it
would be if it was in uh such a close
orbit, but of course uh passing into the
upper atmosphere. It would have soon
lost its uh orbital momentum and crashed
down on the earth. So it just doesn't
make any sense. Um, but it was very
popular at the time and not disproven.
So much so that uh Jules Vern's novel
From the Earth to the Moon talks of the
spacecraft flying past Petit's moon on
the way out to the main ordinary moon.
And this started a whole new sport of
moon finding.
Chief amongst which was Voldemath's
moons, Dr. George Waldermouth in 1898
claimed he'd seen not one but a system
of tiny moons orbiting the earth. The
first of which was
taking 119 days in an orbit that was
beyond our uh existing moon a million
kilometers away and he claimed a
diameter of 700 km. So quite a
significant object.
Canadian astronomer ES Wiggins claimed a
second moon and he even claimed that
he'd seen it cause an anomalous solar
eclipse. So, it had come between the
Earth and the Sun and blotted the sun
out. Um, and a number of observers
backed him up on this, but professional
astronomers, I'm afraid, just laughed at
him because it utterly ridiculous uh
that nobody had else had noticed this uh
total solar eclipse occurring when none
had been predicted.
And uh in the 1898 the magazine science
mentioned a third moon reported by
Voldemath and uh this was supposedly the
vareta unm magnet mond the real weather
and magnet moon. In fact Wiggins had
claimed that his second moon had been
affecting the weather. Well, I suppose
it would be if it was going to come
through the atmosphere, but uh crazy
crazy reports indeed. So, again, this
one was round about 427,000
km from the Earth. So, not far from our
existing moon and again a body 746 km in
diameter. Surely people would have
noticed it. Uh just crazy. Uh but the
sport continued and Pickering got
involved in a widescale search looking
for second moons and managed to rule out
most of them and published
a story the meteoric satellite which I
just wanted to refer to which talked
about the possibility of very small
moons coming into orbit around the earth
and this led to a lot of amateur
astronomers getting involved in looking
for such small objects.
But nowadays we are beginning to find
some truth in this story. This is
Kruithnney, an asteroid in a one-year
long orbit discovered in 1997
which is in an orbit very close to the
Earth and it comes quite close to the
Earth as the animation shows and then
moves away so that it can be on the far
side of the sun at times. Um, and
there's a picture there from 2001 with
the little dashes showing this tiny dot
of Cruithnney. So, not really a moon of
Earth, uh, but takes this very curious
kidney bean-shaped racetrack pattern. If
you hold the Earth still and observe it
from our point of view, it seems to
approach us and move further away. An
example of what we call a horseshoe
orbit. and all based on uh the maths of
Lrangege and the Lrangege points which
I'll talk about in another video. But we
now know of quite a few asteroids, the
so-called Trojan asteroids co-orbital
with the Earth and others that have come
into temporary orbit around the Earth
and then moved away again. And I'll
cover those in another video.
But we do have other things in orbit
permanently around the Earth. Not just
our 40,000
artificial satellites, but we have the
Cordelooski clouds.
Cordalooski, a Polish astronomer,
reported an observation
of a cloud of material which he
associated with being in lunar orbit
positioned at the L5 Lrange point. this
stable position where the threebody
problem of the earth and the moon's
gravity creates a quai stable position
where bodies can remain fixed relative
to the moon and the earth. There are two
of them. The L4 and L5 points are these
quai stable periods 60° ahead and 60°
behind the position of the moon in the
orbit. Um, he postulated that this was a
cloud of debris, perhaps fragments
knocked from the moon, perhaps the
remains of a ring around the Earth.
Quite interesting ideas. And this was
back in the 1970s.
Well, very recently, it's been confirmed
in the last few years. And we have a
very vague photograph, the best we can
do of a cordalooi cloud at the L5
lrangee point um with a number of
satellites, artificial ones photobombing
the image there creating those lines
across. But we can see the uh dark cloud
of material. And we think there's one at
L4 as well. And it's possible that this
is material left over from the formation
of the moon.
A giant impact of a body into the earth
ejected a lot of material into orbit
creating rings around the earth which
probably coalesed into a whole series of
moons and moonlets and that gradually
those have then combined and been swept
up to accrete into the one large moon
that we have today. But there are some
leftovers sat at these Lrangee points,
the Cordalooi clouds.
So, thanks very much for listening and I
hope you've enjoyed that one.